This is less complicated than it looks. In summary: measure, mix, wait,
shape, bake. You need a good scale, and a mixer is awfully nice.

Sprinkle
  1 packet (2 tsp) dry yeast 
in
  440 g lukewarm water (~98°F - it should feel like 'nothing').
Allow to dissolve (5-15 minutes).

Sift or stir thoroughly
  3 g sugar (or brown sugar, malt powder, honey)
  17 g salt
  680 g flours (mostly or all bread flour - my current mix is:
    656 g bread flour
    17 g whole wheat 
    7 g buckwheat).

Stir up the yeast mixture.  Dump the dry ingredients into the yeast mixture.

If you have a Kitchen-Aide, mix with the bread hook on the lowest setting
for ~4 minutes, stopping periodically to pull the dough off the hook.

If mixing by hand, beat with a wooden spoon until it comes together more
or less, then knead with dry floured hands for ~10 minutes. It will be
quite sticky, and you will need to use a pastry scraper to pull it off
the counter. Place in a bowl to rise.

Get a kitchen towel wet with warm water and wring it out. Spread it over your
bowl of dough, not in contact with the dough. Let the dough rest and rise at
room temperature. (Find the coolest spot in the house during summer.)

If you have time, let it rise for about 12 hours, punching down and
turning over once. If you are in a rush, let rise until doubled - maybe
90 minutes.  (I like to measure before bed, mix up the dough before
leaving for work, and shape and bake when I get home.)

Punch down the dough, turn out onto a lightly floured surface, and cut
in two with a knife or pastry scraper. Pat out into two rectangles, as
long as your longest baking sheet, about ¾ inch thick, and however wide
that makes it. Roll the rectangles up into two loaves, and place, seam
sides down, on a parchment papered or cornmeal-strewn baking sheet. Slash
the top of the loaves if desired. Let rise / rest for ~30 minutes, while
preheating oven to 375°F. (Yes, preheat the oven for a long time.)

Place loaves in the oven, turn the oven down to 350°F, and bake 40-45
minutes.  When the loaves are done, tapping the bottom crust will yield
a sort of hollow sound.

This will give a thick 'rustic' crust.

For a thinner, crackly 'Viennese' crust, brush the loaves with water,
or with water and a bit of baking soda and salt, right before placing
them in the oven.

For a resilient dark crust and a denser, spongier texture, put a casserole
dish in the lowest rack of the oven while it preheats, and bring some
water to a boil on top of the stove. Brush the loaves as for 'Viennese'
style. Pour the boiling water into the casserole dish and put the loaves
in the oven. Turn the oven down to 350°F. Bake for ~30 minutes, then
remove the casserole (carefully!) from the oven and bake loaves for
10-15 minutes longer.

Cool the bread thoroughly on racks, out of drafts, before slicing.
(Really. If you want warm bread, toast it, or make rolls. Loaves sliced
before cooling get sadly deflated and flabby.)
